How would you design a data storage
system that wasn't a single spread sheet?
Well, if you have to read and
write a lot of data really quickly
you want the reading and writing
process to be as efficient as possible.
You also want the data to take
up as little space as possible.
In this course, we are focusing on
how a certain kind of database,
relational databases like My SQL,
Teradata, and
others achieve the goals of writing and
retrieving lots of data quickly.
The fundamental concept behind
relational databases is
that they break up data sets into
individual pieces or subsets of data.
Each subset of the data will have a theme
that logically binds the data records and
that subset together.
When you ask to retrieve information, the
database only interacts with the subsets
of data it needs to provide
the information you asked for
rather than interacting with
the entire dataset at the same time.
This general strategy ensures
that the data require as little
space as possible to store.
As we will see in a second it
also provides mechanisms for
retrieving the information that we ask for
very quickly.
Let me tell you a little bit more, what
I meant when I said relational databases
break data sets up into individual
pieces or sub sets data.
It turns out that each sub set of
data is kept in its own table.
So basically what relational databases do
is organize data sets into smaller tables
that each have their own unified theme.
If you think through what it would be
like to keep all the company's data in
multiple spreadsheets,
it becomes clear that linking
together spreadsheets would be a huge
time consuming problem if you didn't
think about how you would combine and
relate the spreadsheets ahead of time.
A similar concept holds
in relational databases.
A critical piece of database
design is making sure each
individual table with its
own unified theme contains
a column with unique values that allows
you to link that table to other tables.
Let's get a sense of what this may
look like by taking a first pass at
how we could design a strategy for
putting the Egger's Roast Coffee spread
sheet into a relational database.
It seems like we have a bunch of
themes in our large spreadsheet.
Company contact information,
loyalty program information,
distribution center information, Egger's
Roast Coffee employee information and,
of course, order information.
So in order to put our large spreadsheet
into a relational database, we could break
the large spread sheet down into separate
tables that each have one of these themes.
One table contains just
the company contact information,
one table contains information
about the loyalty program,
about distribution centers.
One table contains information about
Egger's Roast Coffee employees who
take the orders.
And one table contains
the order information.
We would leave out any of
the calculated fields to save space,
because they could be calculated
whenever we need them.
If we set up our data this way, you can
see that each one of our smaller tables
would have to have a column that would
link it to the order table in some way.
Those linking columns
are indicated here in red.
Let's consider some of the benefits
of breaking our spreadsheet down to
theme tables.
With this new organization,
if we needed to change information about
an employee, we would only have to change
it once in the employee table rather than
having to search and replace a value in
the entire column of over a million rows
every time we wanted to make a change.
We can also add distribution centers to
our database without having to add most of
the blank rows to the main table.
And we can easily add new information
about those distribution centers
to the data set,
like their addresses, without having
to take up much disc storage space.
In addition, it's clear how you could
keep information about historic contact,
even if a store never ended up going
through with the sales process.
Further, we have saved lots of space by
not having to repeat all the information
in the company contact, loyalty program,
distribution center and
Egger's Roast Coffee employees table and
every single row of the orders table.
As you can see,
organizing the dataset in this way
solves a lot of the problems we
talked about in the last video.
In addition, organizing the dataset
into smaller themed tables
makes relational databases
very powerful in another way.
But this consequence is also
probably not very intuitive.
Here's a summary.
Computers don't yet run on magic although
admittedly it often seems like they do.
In order to have a computer program
do something like link up tables for
you, you have to have a way of
telling the computer how to do that.
You have to be able to program
in the appropriate rules and
operations that will lead
to the outcomes you want.
It turns out that thinking of data as
groups of related items that can interact
allows programmers to take advantage of
the mathematical theory called set theory
and a kind of algebra called relational
algebra to write an elegant and
complete programming language for
each reading information.
SInce the theme of set theory
will occur again in the course,
I'd like to take a moment to give
you an intuition for how set theory
forms the basis of relational databases,
even if we don't go over any of the math.
Mathematical set theory defines a set as
a collection of unique objects that have
something in common or
that follow a common rule.
A set can be a collection
of anything really,
as long as the things in the set
clearly have common features.
If we think of each of our database
tables as collection of columns and
collections of rows, treating a table
as two intersecting collections or
sets seems like a reasonable thing to do.
Relational algebra tells you
how you can manipulate sets.
In other words, do things like subtract
one from another, add them together, and
find where they overlap.
So if each table is a set of columns and
rows we can use relational algebra
to write a computer program to tell the
computer how to select subsets of data for
us and,
how to combine sets of data across tables.
The words we use in our commands
the database will reflect
this relational algebra.
Now here's the really cool part,
set theory's a form of logic.
It's said that set theory was founded
by the single paper in 1874, so it's
been studied for a really long time and
is really well understood at this point.
Therefore, we know how to write algorithms
that come up with the mathematically
optimal way to manipulate subsets.
By basing our databases on set theory,
we can take advantage of these algorithms.
What this means is that relational
databases based on set theory,
as long as they are set up correctly,
can pull together the subsets of data
we ask for really really quickly
in a mathematically optimal way, even if
those data sets reside in multiple tables.
That's why relational databases are still
some of the fastest databases out
there for manipulating and
recombining stored tabular data.
If at some point in your career you become
in interested in optimizing the speed in
which the database you are working
with outputs information
you will start working with
these algorithms directly.
There's a command that asks the database
to tell how it would implement
a hypothetical query and
you can use that information to write
an alternative version of
the command that can be run faster.
Even if you don't focus on set theory
algorithms much in the way you end up
interacting with your company's database.
The database will be
configured to abide by as many
of the requirements of
set theory as possible.
So that the algorithms can
be taken advantage of.
It will be useful to you to know
what those requirements are.
First of all,
single tables should represent
the smallest logical part of a data set.
Next, each column in a table
must represent a unique category
of information.
Each row in a table must represent unique
instance of that information as well.
Another important requirement
is that order of columns or
row in a table can't matter.
This will allow the database to pull
them together in whatever order or
fashion it determines will be the fastest.
Relational databases have some
additional advantages beyond their
principal method for outputting
subsets of information we care about.
To start, relational database systems have
built in some features that help maintain
data integrity.
For example,
when you set up a relational database,
you define exactly what type
of data go into each column.
And that database can prevent you from
putting another type of data in there.
That means you wouldn't be able to write
a number by accident when you were suppose
to enter a word.
You can also define whether or
not a column will allow no values.
Further, relational databases allow you
to specify who has permission to access
certain part of the database in exactly in
what ways overall, what this means is that
as long as we can figure out how to put
the data we care about into collections of
tables, relational databases provide
a very powerful way to store and
retrieve our data in an extremely safe and
reliable fashion.
They pretty much solve all
the problems spreadsheets don't.
That's why, as we heard Ryan tell us at
the beginning of the course, almost every
company uses a relational database for
some part of the data in their company.
They are mathematically elegant,
and they work really well for
data that fit into columns and rows.
That's also why it will benefit you so
much as a data analyst to learn how to
interact with these types of databases.